This page lists instructions for building the [[xf86-input-wacom]] driver.
For [[linuxwacom]]-specific instructions, click [[Building linuxwacom|here]]

== Getting the source ==
We recommend to use [[Using Git|git]] to get the source straight from the repository
    git clone git://linuxwacom.git.sourceforge.net/gitroot/linuxwacom/xf86-input-wacom
    cd xf86-input-wacom

Alternatively, grab the latest release from the [https://sourceforge.net/projects/linuxwacom/files/xf86-input-wacom/ downloads page] and unpack it with
    tar jxf xf86-input-wacom-<version number>.tar.bz2
    cd xf86-input-wacom-<version-number>

== Configuring the build ==
We provide a helper script ''autogen.sh'' that wraps the [http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/GNU_build_system autotools] steps.
First make sure you have the following tools installed: gcc, automake, autoconf and make.
Then run autogen.sh:

    ./autogen.sh --prefix=/usr --libdir=/usr/lib        # on 32-bit install
    ./autogen.sh --prefix=/usr --libdir=/usr/lib64      # on 64 bit install

{{Warning|reason=If you are building from tarball, use ''./configure'' instead of ''./autogen.sh''. This will be fixed in the driver soon.}}

Both commands cover the common Linux distributions but there is a small chance
that your distribution needs different prefixes or libdirs. The easiest way to
check is to search for a file named ''evdev_drv.so''. If it is in
''/usr/lib64/xorg/modules/input'' or ''/usr/lib/xorg/modules/input'', then the
above commands will work for you.

''autogen.sh'' calls configure which will check whether the required
dependencies are installed. If any are missing, you need to install the
dependencies, either from your distribution's packaging system or from the
respective project's releases. Once installed, re-run ''autogen.sh'' as above.

Dependencies include (this list may change as the driver is update):
* the X server SDK
* libX11, libXi and libXrandr development files

== Building ==
    make
    make install # may require sudo/root

Note that if you configured with a prefix of ''/usr'' you will overwrite your
distribution's install. If you have an X server tree outside of your system
tree, adjust the prefix accordingly.
We recommend that  use the same build flags as your distribution does if you
are trying to replace the distribution-installed version of the driver with the
version from git.

* [http://koji.fedoraproject.org/koji/packageinfo?packageID=9537 Fedora]: select the latest build for your version and look at the build.log. Search for the configure line and copy everything from that line. 

== Running the new driver ==
Once installed, restart your X server by logging out. When the server comes back up, it will use the new driver. You can verify this by checking the version number in the ''/var/log/Xorg.0.log''.

<pre>
(II) LoadModule: "wacom"
(II) Loading /opt/xorg/lib/xorg/modules/input/wacom_drv.so
(II) Module wacom: vendor="X.Org Foundation"
        compiled for 1.7.99.3, module version = 0.10.3
        Module class: X.Org XInput Driver
        ABI class: X.Org XInput driver, version 9.0
</pre>

The ''module version'' number will show the current version number of the
driver. This snippet shows a wacom version of 0.10.3 compiled against a server
version 1.7.99.3. In addition, you'll find lines in the log listing the actual
device found and its configuration. 

<pre>
(II) config/hal: Adding input device Wacom Intuos4 6x9
(**) Option "Device" "/dev/input/event13"
(II) Wacom Intuos4 6x9: type not specified, assuming 'stylus'.
(II) Wacom Intuos4 6x9: other types will be automatically added.
(**) Wacom Intuos4 6x9: always reports core events
(II) Wacom Intuos4 6x9: hotplugging dependent devices.
(**) Option "Device" "/dev/input/event13"
(**) Wacom Intuos4 6x9 eraser: always reports core events
(II) XINPUT: Adding extended input device "Wacom Intuos4 6x9 eraser" (type: ERASER)
(--) Wacom Intuos4 6x9 eraser: using pressure threshold of 245 for button 1
(--) Wacom Intuos4 6x9 eraser: Wacom USB Intuos4 tablet speed=38400 maxX=44704 maxY=27940 maxZ=2047 resX=5080 resY=5080  tilt=enabled
(--) Wacom Intuos4 6x9 eraser: top X=0 top Y=0 bottom X=44704 bottom Y=27940 resol X=5080 resol Y=5080
(**) Option "Device" "/dev/input/event13"
(**) Wacom Intuos4 6x9 cursor: always reports core events
(II) XINPUT: Adding extended input device "Wacom Intuos4 6x9 cursor" (type: CURSOR)
(--) Wacom Intuos4 6x9 cursor: top X=0 top Y=0 bottom X=44704 bottom Y=27940 resol X=5080 resol Y=5080
(**) Option "Device" "/dev/input/event13"
(**) Wacom Intuos4 6x9 pad: always reports core events
(II) XINPUT: Adding extended input device "Wacom Intuos4 6x9 pad" (type: PAD)
(--) Wacom Intuos4 6x9 pad: top X=0 top Y=0 bottom X=44704 bottom Y=27940 resol X=5080 resol Y=5080
(II) Wacom Intuos4 6x9: hotplugging completed.
</pre>

The actual text of the log depends on the device but it looks similar. 

[[Category:HOWTO]]
[[Category:DeveloperPages]]