For working tablet support, you need two vital pieces installed on your machine. A kernel driver that recognises the tablet and understands the hardware protocol, and an X driver that allows X to use the device.

Some information 

= X driver development =
[[xf86-input-wacom]] is in a git repository. To develop, the following steps are required:
* clone the source
  git clone git://linuxwacom.git.sourceforge.net/gitroot/linuxwacom/xf86-input-wacom
* build the source
  ./autogen.sh --prefix=/usr
* hack it!
* create a patch with '''git format-patch'''
* submit the patch to the [https://lists.sourceforge.net/lists/listinfo/linuxwacom-devel linuxwacom-devel mailing list]

For more information on these steps, see 
* [[Using Git]]
* [[Installing from source]]
* [[Submitting Patches]]

== Developing for linuxwacom ==
linuxwacom is a collection of backports for both older kernels and older X servers. The linuxwacom repository is maintained in CVS and releases are made regularly. If you want to propose a patch, please follow the instructions [[LinuxwacomDevelopment | here]]

= Kernel driver development =

For Wacom kernel driver development, please submit your patches to the [http://lkml.org Linux Kernel Developers Mailing List]. Only patches that appear in the upstream kernel will be appear in distributions and thus ensure tablets will be working out-of-the-box with future releases of your distribution.

'''FIXME''' more information needed here.

Note that kernel patches integrated into the [[linuxwacom]] tarball usually do not find their way upstream and thus need to be re-implemented or forward-ported for future kernels. Additionally, kernel patches in linuxwacom are not shipped by any major distribution. Any kernel developer is encouraged to work on the [http://kernel.org upstream kernel] instead.

= Kernel Data =
[[Intuos4 Kernel Data stream]]

[[Kernel Input Event Overview]]

= Developer Pages =
All pages with information related to development are part of the Category ''DeveloperPages''. Click on [[:Category:DeveloperPages]] to get an overview of this category.

= Maintainer information =
* [[Making Releases]]: information on how to cut a new release for [[xf86-input-wacom]].