'''linuxwacom''' is a legacy driver package containing both an X driver and Linux kernel driver. It supports X servers from 1.4 to 1.6 and provides backports for Linux kernels from 2.6.16 to 2.6.25. '''If you run a reasonably modern desktop distribution, you do not need this package.''' All linuxwacom-related pages can be found in this wiki's [[:Category:Linuxwacom|linuxwacom category]].

== Getting the Source ==
linuxwacom provides two types of packages - stable and development versions. Please download the latest release from the [https://sourceforge.net/projects/linuxwacom/files/ sourceforge download section] and unpack it with:

<pre>
tar jxf linuxwacom-<version number>.tar.bz2
cd linuxwacom-<version number>
</pre>

<!-- Add instructions that work before uncommenting this (or verify 'building the code' works as-is)
Alternatively, pre-release code is available at the [http://linuxwacom.git.sourceforge.net/git/gitweb.cgi?p=linuxwacom/linuxwacom;a=summary linuxwacom git repository]:
<pre>
git clone git://linuxwacom.git.sourceforge.net/gitroot/linuxwacom/linuxwacom
cd linuxwacom
</pre>
-->
== Building the code ==
Once you have the package downloaded, you can build it with the commands below. A more exhaustive description of the build process is avaiable in [[building linuxwacom]].

The <code>--enable-wacom</code> flag enables the build of the wacom kernel driver; if you do not want to build it, simply leave out this flag. The prefix of /usr is correct on most distributions (unfortunately, the default is still /usr/local which isn't used widely anymore).

<pre>
./configure --prefix=/usr --enable-wacom
make
make install   # may require sudo/root
</pre>

== linuxwacom X Driver ==
The linuxwacom tarball includes an X driver for X servers up to including the 1.6.x series. For newer X servers, please use [[xf86-input-wacom]] instead: the linuxwacom X driver will not build.
Note that if you run a kernel that requires linuxwacom backports, you may still do so. Install the kernel patches provided in the tarball and then the [[xf86-input-wacom]] X driver.