= xf86-input-wacom =
This section describes how to do a new xf86-input-wacom release. VERSION stands for the new version (e.g. 0.10.3), OLDVERSION for the previous version (e.g. 0.10.2).

# Change configure.ac to reflect the new version number and commit: '''git commit -sm "wacom VERSION" configure.ac''' You ''must not'' have uncommitted changes when releasing a new version.
# Tag the module: '''git tag -m "xf86-input-wacom VERSION" -s xf86-input-wacom-VERSION
# Run '''make distcheck'''. Verify the name of the tarball (xf86-input-wacom-VERSION.tar.bz2). If make distcheck fails, delete the tag with '''git tag -d xf86-input-wacom-VERSION''', reset with '''git reset --hard HEAD~1''' and resolve the bugs first.
# Build and install the driver from the tarball. Verify that the new version shows in the Xorg.log.
# Push to the remote: '''git push origin master'''
# Run the release script: '''sh release.sh'''. This script will push the tag and upload the tarball to the remote.
# Type up a short announce email summarising the new features in this version and append the git shortlog: '''git shortlog xf86-input-wacom-OLDVERSION..xf86-input-wacom-VERSION'''
# '''Sign off the email''' and send it to the [[Mailing lists | linuxwacom-announce list]]
# Change the default download on Sourceforge to be the newly-uploaded tarball
# Close all Sourceforge and Github bugs that were fixed in this release by setting the status to "closed-fixed" and posting the following message: "Fix available in xf86-input-wacom <version>"

Note that it may take a while until the uploaded tarballs are available through the download links.

= libwacom =
This section describes how to do a new [[libwacom]] release.  

# Update <code>NEWS</code> with an outline of changes since the last version
# Change LIBWACOM_LT_VERSION according to the directions in configure.ac
# Change configure.ac to reflect the new version number and commit: '''git commit -sm "libwacom VERSION" configure.ac NEWS''' You ''must not'' have uncommitted changes when releasing a new version.
# Run '''autoreconf -iv''' or '''autogen.sh''', build and install the library. Verify that ''' pkg-config --modversion libwacom''' shows the new version
# Run '''make distcheck'''. Verify the name of the tarball (libwacom-VERSION.tar.bz2).
# Tag the module: '''git tag -m "libwacom VERSION" -s libwacom-VERSION
# Push to the remote: '''git push origin master''' and for the tag '''git push origin libwacom-VERSION'''
# Scp the tarball to sourceforge. [[DealingWithSourceforge|Create a shell]] and then run '''scp libwacom-VERSION.tar.bz2 USER@shell.sourceforge.net:/home/frs/project/linuxwacom/libwacom'''
# Generate the git shortlog with '''git log --no-merges libwacom-0.4..libwacom-0.5 | git shortlog''', then add the NEWS section you added above.
# '''Sign off the email''' and send it to the [[Mailing lists | linuxwacom-announce list]]
# Close all Sourceforge and Github bugs that were fixed in this release by setting the status to "closed-fixed" and posting the following message: "Fix available in libwacom <version>"

Note that it may take a while until the uploaded tarballs are available through the download links.

= input-wacom =
This section describes how to do a new [[input-wacom]] release.

# Merge master into all current upstream branches (e.g. jiri/for-4.14). Merge branches for ''released'' kernels back into master (if RC kernel code needs to be part of a release, check with other developers before continuing). Use the '--no-ff' option with 'git merge' to force a commit message.
# Change configure.ac to reflect the new version number and commit: '''git commit -sm "input-wacom VERSION" configure.ac''' You ''must not'' have uncommitted changes when releasing a new version.
# Tag the module: '''git tag -m "input-wacom VERSION" -s input-wacom-VERSION'''. You will use your pgp key for this step.
# Run '''./autogen.sh''' and then '''make distcheck'''. Verify the name of the tarball (input-wacom-VERSION.tar.bz2).
# Build, install, and load the driver from the tarball.
# Verify the version number of the loaded driver with `modinfo wacom | grep version`.
# Push to both SourceForge and Github remotes: '''git push origin master && git push mirror master'''.
# By default, the git push command doesn’t transfer tags to remote servers. Push the tag to the remotes: '''git push origin input-wacom-VERSION && git push mirror input-wacom-VERSION'''.
# Run the release script: '''sh release.sh''' with the correct arguments (--user <sf_username>@ --github <gh_username> <path>). Your github username may need a personal access token attached. Your path is probably 'dot' (.). This script will push the tag and upload the tarball to the remote.
# Type up a short announcement summarizing the new features in this version and insert it in the generated .announce email file (the git shortlog).
# '''Sign off the email''' and send it to the [[Mailing lists | linuxwacom-announce list]] using git send-email.
# Close all Sourceforge and Github bugs that were fixed in this release '''''and''' which are fixed in an upstream Linux release'' by setting the status to "closed-fixed" and posting the following message: "Fix available in Linux <version> and input-wacom <version>"

[[Category:MaintainerPages]]