Devices supported by the Linux Wacom Project are listed below. See the [[Device IDs]] page for additional detail.

<b>Serial devices:</b>
* UD series & PenPartner*
* Graphire & Intuos series*
* Cintiq series*
* TabletPC (with/without touch)

<b>USB series:</b>
* Graphire series
* Cintiq (V4 series)
* CintiqPartner
* Intuos 1, 2, 3, & 4
* Cintiq (V5 series)
* Volito series
* PenPartner series
* PL & DTF
* Bamboo, Bamboo1, & BambooFun
* Bamboo Pen & Touch
* TabletPC (with/without touch)

<b>Bluetooth series:</b>
* Graphire Bluetooth Wireless
* Intuos4 Wireless*


NOTE:  Only ISDV4 serial devices (TabletPC's) are currently supported by xf86-input-wacom (Xserver 1.7 or later).  For legacy serial graphics tablets a pair of serio kernel drivers are being developed, that in conjunction with inputattach, provide support on xf86-input-wacom.  They are both currently working and near completion and submission to the kernel.  The protocol IV tablet's (including the Digitizer II, PenPartner, Graphire, and Cintiq tablets) latest wacom_serial.ko is available [http://cipht.net/releases/wacom_serial-120301-1.tar.bz2 here].  The protocol V tablet's (Intuos and Instuos2) wacom_serial5.ko is available [https://github.com/RoaldFre/wacom_serial5 here].

NOTE:  The Intuos 4 Wireless is not currently supported by the Bluez stack.  However patches for support are actively being developed.  See the [http://linuxwacom.git.sourceforge.net/git/gitweb.cgi?p=linuxwacom/wacom-kernel;a=shortlog;h=refs/heads/devel wacom-kernel] repository and the [https://sourceforge.net/mailarchive/forum.php?forum_name=linuxwacom-devel linuxwacom-devel archive].  In the meantime you can use your usb "charging" cable.

NOTE: A FreeBSD Wacom driver is available through the [http://www.freshports.org/x11-drivers/input-wacom FreeBSD] ports system. Please email your questions and/or suggestion directly to [mailto:freebsd@chillt.de?subject=WACOM Bartosz Fabianowski], the Wacom FreeBSD developer.