This page is for general tablet pc issues & tips as well as Brand and model specific issues & tips.

The linuxwacom project welcomes additions to its mediawiki so please join in if you have contributions.

Be aware the Wacom drivers are rapidly evolving and some of this information may become dated.  If so feel free to update and correct the mediawiki.

== Fujitsu tablet pc's ==
'''Tip''' If your Wacom digitizer does not initialize (respond) on boot many have found restarting X gets it working.

== Calibration of Your Tablet PC ==

See the [[Calibration|Calibration HOWTO]].

== Dual and Multi-Monitor Set Up ==
See [[Dual and Multi-Monitor Set Up]].

== Graphical Configuration GUI ==
Work is proceeding on a replacement for wacomcpl.  See [[External applications#Graphical Configuration Tools|Graphical Configuration Tools]].

== Screen Rotation ==
See [[Rotation#Tablet PC Rotation Script|Tablet PC Rotation Script]].

=== Tablet PC Automatic Rotation Script ===

The following script was developed for HP tablet pc's.  Lenovo ThinkPads (and very likely other tablet pc's) should be able to use it too with a minor modification.

Determine your "Device names" with 'xinput list' entered in a terminal. Then substitute them for stylus, eraser, and touch (if you have it) in the following shell script using the quotes around the "Device names". Only use the [[xsetwacom]] commands for the devices you have.

Notice the script assumes you have [[External applications#CellWriter|CellWriter]] installed.  You can substitute the onscreen keyboard of your choice or comment out or remove the lines.
<pre>
#!/bin/bash

old="0"
while true; do
	if [[ -e /sys/devices/platform/hp-wmi/tablet ]]; then
		new=`cat /sys/devices/platform/hp-wmi/tablet`
		if [[ $new != $old ]]; then
			if [[ $new == "0" ]]; then
				echo "Rotate to landscape, hide CellWriter."
				xrandr -o normal
				xsetwacom set stylus rotate none
				xsetwacom set eraser rotate none
				xsetwacom set touch rotate none
				cellwriter --hide-window
			elif [[ $new == "1" ]]; then
				echo "Rotate to portrait, show CellWriter."
				xrandr -o right
				xsetwacom set stylus rotate cw
				xsetwacom set eraser rotate cw
				xsetwacom set touch rotate cw
				cellwriter --show-window
			fi
		fi
		old=$new
		sleep 1s
	fi
done

# From Red_Lion post #576:  http://ubuntuforums.org/showthread.php?t=845911&page=58
</pre>
Save it in "/home/yourusername/" as ".automagic_rotation.sh" (without the quotes), or whatever you want to name it.  Make the file executable and add it to your Startup Applications.

For the '''ThinkPad''' all you should need to do is change the lines.
<pre>
	if [[ -e /sys/devices/platform/hp-wmi/tablet ]]; then
		new=`cat /sys/devices/platform/hp-wmi/tablet`
</pre>
to
<pre>
	if [[ -e /sys/devices/platform/thinkpad_acpi/hotkey_tablet_mode ]]; then
		new=`cat /sys/devices/platform/thinkpad_acpi/hotkey_tablet_mode`
</pre>
Using these examples, if your tablet pc Brand & model also reports the swivel hinge state, you should be able to modify the script to work for you.

Also see [[External applications#Magick Rotation|Magick Rotation]].

== Touch Toggle Scripts ==
Turning touch off can be convenient when working in a graphics program, so you don't have to worry about accidentally issuing a command, or worse, drawing a line if you incidentally touch the tablet's screen when not holding the stylus.  Additionally some serial & N-trig tablet pc's  have issues with extra lines being drawn in applications such as Xournal, when touch is on while writing with the stylus.

=== Wacom tablet pc Script ===
The following script depends on the [[xsetwacom]] get and set commands.  The get command determines whether touch is on or off while the two set commands turn touch on or off.   The "device name" for touch is found by using 'xsetwacom list' as mentioned in the script comments.
<pre>
#!/bin/bash

## Get the "device name" or ID number
## for touch from 'xsetwacom list'

DEVICE="Wacom ISDv4 Finger touch"
TOUCH_STATE=`xsetwacom get "$DEVICE" touch`
if [ "$TOUCH_STATE" == "on" ]
  then
    echo "Touch is ON, turning OFF."
    xsetwacom set "$DEVICE" touch off
  else
    echo "Touch is OFF, turning ON."
    xsetwacom set "$DEVICE" touch on
fi
</pre>
Enter the script in a file called .toggle-touch.sh (or whatever you want) and place it in your home directory. Remember it will be a hidden file because of the . in front. Also please remember you have to chmod it to make it executable, or right click on it and make it executable through Properties. Then you can place it in a launcher or  bind a key to the script.  If you drag the launcher into a panel it will execute with a single click.

=== N-trig tablet pc Script ===
N-Trigs can also have the issue of extra lines being drawn even when using the stylus if touch is on.  If you have the HP TX2z or Dell XT & XT2 you likely have your touch on the evdev driver rather than the Wacom driver.  In that case the Touch Toggle Script above will not work for you. You can use the following script  modified for the evdev driver.  This script works in a different manner from the one above.  When first toggled it issues the xinput touch disable command (0) and then creates a file called touch_off in the /tmp directory.  When toggled again it checks for the presence of the touch_off file and if present issues the xinput touch enabled (1) command, followed by the deletion of the file.

<pre>
#!/bin/bash

## evdev touch toggle script
##
## Get the "Device name" or ID number
## for touch from 'xinput list'.

if [ -f /tmp/touch_off ]; then
        xinput set-prop 'N-Trig Touchscreen' 'Device Enabled' 1
	rm -f /tmp/touch_off && exit 0
else
        xinput set-prop 'N-Trig Touchscreen' 'Device Enabled' 0
	echo 1 > /tmp/touch_off && exit 0
fi
</pre>


[[Category:HOWTO]]