__TOC__
This page shows you how to assemble a runtime or static configuration for a specific tablet or tablet PC model.  Additionally it demonstrates how to create profiles for various applications.

The linuxwacom project welcomes additions to its mediawiki so please join in if you have contributions.

Currently [[xf86-input-wacom]] does not have a configuration gui like linuxwacom's Wacom Control Panel (wacomcpl).  However since '''wacomcpl''' stored its settings as a [[xsetwacom]] script in '''.xinitrc''' you can essentially duplicate the .xinitrc, calling it say '''.xsetwacom.sh'''.  '''This can be considered a work around''' while waiting for the development of a Tablet Configuration GUI, see [[External applications#Graphical Configuration Tools|Graphical Configuration Tools]].

It should be relatively straight forward to assemble a configuration script for your tablet.  Be sure to read ''man wacom'', ''man xsetwacom'', [[Xsetwacom]], and enter ''xsetwacom list parameters'' in a terminal to learn about the parameters or Options you may want to change.  As you will see a script can give you some finer control over your tablet's features and also let you create profiles.

== Runtime (xsetwacom) Configuration ==
A ''xsetwacom set'' command assigns a specified value to a parameter during runtime.  The ''xsetwacom get'' command returns the current value the parameter is ''set'' to.
{{:Xsetwacom}}
{{Warning|reason=With the advent of [https://sourceforge.net/projects/linuxwacom/files/xf86-input-wacom/ xf86-input-wacom-10.11] many of the xsetwacom parameter names have changed.  See [[Xsetwacom#Table of New Parameter Names|Table of New Parameter Names]].  Be aware that the xsetwacom interface may change without notice.}}
To help with the new parameter names transition a table was added to the code.  Now when using an old parameter name in a ''get'' or ''set'' command in a terminal the response will include the new parameter name.

=== Stylus, Eraser, Cursor, Touch ===
The various sections below demonstrate most of the valid ''xsetwacom set'' command parameters that apply to a given input tool.  The values shown are the defaults.  Find the relevant "device name" by entering ''[[xinput]] list'' in a console.

''Stylus'' section
<pre>
xsetwacom set "device name" Suppress 2
xsetwacom set "device name" RawSample 4
xsetwacom set "device name" Threshold 27
xsetwacom set "device name" PressureCurve 0 0 100 100
xsetwacom set "device name" TabletPCButton on  # default for tablet PCs, it's off for tablets
xsetwacom set "device name" Mode Absolute
xsetwacom set "device name" Button 1 1
xsetwacom set "device name" Button 2 3
xsetwacom set "device name" Button 3 2
xsetwacom set "device name" Area 0 0 ?? ??
</pre>

''Eraser'' section
<pre>
xsetwacom set "device name" Suppress 2
xsetwacom set "device name" RawSample 4
xsetwacom set "device name" Threshold 27
xsetwacom set "device name" PressureCurve 0 0 100 100
xsetwacom set "device name" Mode Absolute
xsetwacom set "device name" Button 1 1
xsetwacom set "device name" Area 0 0 ?? ??
</pre>

''Cursor'' section
<pre>
xsetwacom set "device name" Suppress 2 
xsetwacom set "device name" RawSample 4
xsetwacom set "device name" CursorProximity 10  # default depends on tablet
xsetwacom set "device name" Mode Relative
xsetwacom set "device name" Button 1 1
xsetwacom set "device name" Button 2 2
xsetwacom set "device name" Button 3 3
xsetwacom set "device name" Area 0 0 ?? ??
</pre>

''Touch, single finger'' (1FGT) section
<pre>
xsetwacom set "device name" Touch on
xsetwacom set "device name" Suppress 2
xsetwacom set "device name" RawSample 4
xsetwacom set "device name" Threshold 27
xsetwacom set "device name" Mode Absolute
xsetwacom set "device name" TapTime 250
xsetwacom set "device name" Button 1 1
xsetwacom set "device name" Area 0 0 ?? ??
</pre>

''Touch, two finger'' (2FGT) section
<pre>
xsetwacom set "device name" Touch on
xsetwacom set "device name" Gesture on
xsetwacom set "device name" Suppress 2
xsetwacom set "device name" RawSample 4
xsetwacom set "device name" Threshold 27
xsetwacom set "device name" Mode Relative
xsetwacom set "device name" Button 1 1
xsetwacom set "device name" ZoomDistance 50
xsetwacom set "device name" ScrollDistance 20
xsetwacom set "device name" TapTime 250
xsetwacom set "device name" Area 0 0 ?? ??
</pre>

=== Pad ===
The sections below demonstrate a sample of the various tablets with tablet buttons or a ''pad''.  They are ordered to somewhat mimic the physical layout of the various pads.  Enter ''xsetwacom list modifiers'' in a console to see the modifiers and special keys available.  You can also use ''dumpkeys'' to check what keys are available on your system.  You need to be root to run it.  The commands with probably the two most useful switches are ''sudo dumpkeys --long-info'' and ''sudo dumpkeys --funcs-only'', if you have sudo installed.  See ''man dumpkeys''.

==== Bamboo Pen & Touch ====
The following button values or assignments are the defaults.
{{Tip|text=Bamboo P & Ts if ''Button 4'' is not working change it to ''Button 8''.  The issue is due to esoteric key mapping reasons resolved in recent kernels.}}
<pre>
xsetwacom set "Wacom BambooFun 2FG 4x5 Finger pad" Button 1 1
xsetwacom set "Wacom BambooFun 2FG 4x5 Finger pad" Button 2 2
xsetwacom set "Wacom BambooFun 2FG 4x5 Finger pad" Button 3 3
xsetwacom set "Wacom BambooFun 2FG 4x5 Finger pad" Button 4 4
</pre>

'''Since the defaults are not very illuminating the following contains a hodgepodge of possible Button assignments to illustrate the possibilities.  These assignments are just examples.'''
==== Graphire4 ====
<pre>
xsetwacom set "Wacom Graphire4 4x5 pad" Button 1 "key p"  # Paintbrush
xsetwacom set "Wacom Graphire4 4x5 pad" AbsWheelDown "key minus"  # Zoom out
xsetwacom set "Wacom Graphire4 4x5 pad" AbsWheelUp "key plus"  # Zoom in
xsetwacom set "Wacom Graphire4 4x5 pad" Button 2 "key ctrl z"  # Undo
</pre>

==== Bamboo ====
<pre>
xsetwacom set "Wacom BambooFun 4x5 pad" Button 1 "key esc"
xsetwacom set "Wacom BambooFun 4x5 pad" Button 2 "key F12 "
xsetwacom set "Wacom BambooFun 4x5 pad" AbsWheelDown "key ctrl shift s"
xsetwacom set "Wacom BambooFun 4x5 pad" AbsWheelUp "key ctrl shift s"
xsetwacom set "Wacom BambooFun 4x5 pad" Button 3 "key KP_Next"
xsetwacom set "Wacom BambooFun 4x5 pad" Button 4 "key KP_Prior"
</pre>

==== Intuos3 ====
Gimp pad button examples
<pre>
xsetwacom set "Wacom Intuos3 6x8 pad" Button 1 "key r"  # rectangular selections
xsetwacom set "Wacom Intuos3 6x8 pad" Button 2 "key ctrl shift a"  # select none
xsetwacom set "Wacom Intuos3 6x8 pad" Button 3 "key p"  # paintbrush
xsetwacom set "Wacom Intuos3 6x8 pad" Button 4 "key tab"  # toggle docks
xsetwacom set "Wacom Intuos3 6x8 pad" StripLDn "key minus"  # zoom out
xsetwacom set "Wacom Intuos3 6x8 pad" StripLUp "key shift plus"  # zoom in

xsetwacom set "Wacom Intuos3 6x8 pad" StripRDn "key alt down"  # brush radius (must be mapped in GIMP)
xsetwacom set "Wacom Intuos3 6x8 pad" StripRUp "key alt up"
xsetwacom set "Wacom Intuos3 6x8 pad" Button 5 "key shift control left"  # prev/next brush (must be mapped in GIMP; disables float)
xsetwacom set "Wacom Intuos3 6x8 pad" Button 6 "key shift control right"
xsetwacom set "Wacom Intuos3 6x8 pad" Button 7 "key ctrl shift e"  # fit Image in window
xsetwacom set "Wacom Intuos3 6x8 pad" Button 8 "key F11"  # fullscreen
</pre>
Inkscape pad button examples
<pre>
Button 1 "key F2"  # Node Tool
Button 2 "key h"  # Flip horizontal
Button 3 "key F1"  # Selection tool
Button 4 "key shift"
StripLDn "key Prior"  # page up
StripLUp "key Next"  # page down

StripRDn "key KP_Add"  # NumpadPlus
StripRUp "key KP_Subtract"  # NumpadMinus
Button 5 "key F6"  # Pencil Tool
Button 6 "key F8"  # Fill and Stroke Dialog
Button 7 "key F9"  # Toggle View Mode
Button 8 "key F12"  # Layers Dialog
</pre>

==== Intuos4 ====
{{Tip|text=Similar to the Bamboo P & Ts above, with the 2.6.32 kernel, key mapping for the Intuos4 buttons may be 1 2 3 8 9 10 11 12 13.  Again the issue is due to esoteric key mapping reasons resolved in recent kernels, 2.6.37(?) and later.}}
<pre>
xsetwacom set "Wacom Intuos4 6x9 pad" Button 2 "key ctrl"
xsetwacom set "Wacom Intuos4 6x9 pad" Button 3 "key alt"
xsetwacom set "Wacom Intuos4 6x9 pad" Button 4 "key shift"
xsetwacom set "Wacom Intuos4 6x9 pad" Button 5 "key ctrl alt shift o"  # Gimp brush down

xsetwacom set "Wacom Intuos4 6x9 pad" AbsWheelDown "key shift plus"
xsetwacom set "Wacom Intuos4 6x9 pad" Button 1 "key 1"  # button inside touchring, zoom 100%
xsetwacom set "Wacom Intuos4 6x9 pad" AbsWheelUp "key minus"

xsetwacom set "Wacom Intuos4 6x9 pad" Button 6 "key ctrl alt shift p"  # Gimp brush up
xsetwacom set "Wacom Intuos4 6x9 pad" Button 7 "key backspace"
xsetwacom set "Wacom Intuos4 6x9 pad" Button 8 "key ctrl s"  # save
xsetwacom set "Wacom Intuos4 6x9 pad" Button 9 "key ctrl z"  # Undo in Gimp
</pre>

==== Cintiq 21 ====
<pre>
xsetwacom set "Wacom Cintiq 21UX2 pad" StripLDn "key minus"  # zoom out
xsetwacom set "Wacom Cintiq 21UX2 pad" StripLUp "key shift plus"  # zoom in
xsetwacom set "Wacom Cintiq 21UX2 pad" Button 1 "key r"  # rectangular selections
xsetwacom set "Wacom Cintiq 21UX2 pad" Button 2 "key ctrl shift a"  # select none
xsetwacom set "Wacom Cintiq 21UX2 pad" Button 3 "key p"  # paintbrush
xsetwacom set "Wacom Cintiq 21UX2 pad" Button 4 "key tab"  # toggle docks
xsetwacom set "Wacom Cintiq 21UX2 pad" AbsWheelDown "key shift plus"
xsetwacom set "Wacom Cintiq 21UX2 pad" AbsWheelUp "key minus"
xsetwacom set "Wacom Cintiq 21UX2 pad" Button 5 "key shift control left"  # prev/next brush (must be mapped in GIMP)
xsetwacom set "Wacom Cintiq 21UX2 pad" Button 6 "key shift control right" 
xsetwacom set "Wacom Cintiq 21UX2 pad" Button 7 "key ctrl shift e"  #  fit Image in window
xsetwacom set "Wacom Cintiq 21UX2 pad" Button 8 "key F11"  # fullscreen

xsetwacom set "Wacom Cintiq 21UX2 pad" StripRDn "key alt down"  # brush radius (must be mapped in GIMP)
xsetwacom set "Wacom Cintiq 21UX2 pad" StripRUp "key alt up"
xsetwacom set "Wacom Cintiq 21UX2 pad" Button 9 "key ctrl"
xsetwacom set "Wacom Cintiq 21UX2 pad" Button 10 "key alt"
xsetwacom set "Wacom Cintiq 21UX2 pad" Button 11 "key shift"
xsetwacom set "Wacom Cintiq 21UX2 pad" Button 12 "key tab"
xsetwacom set "Wacom Cintiq 21UX2 pad" AbsWheelDown "key alt up"  # Increase brush radius (must be mapped in GIMP)
xsetwacom set "Wacom Cintiq 21UX2 pad" AbsWheelUp "key alt down"  # Decrease brush radius (must be mapped in GIMP)
xsetwacom set "Wacom Cintiq 21UX2 pad" Button 13 "key apostrophe"
xsetwacom set "Wacom Cintiq 21UX2 pad" Button 14 "key backspace"
xsetwacom set "Wacom Cintiq 21UX2 pad" Button 15 "key backslash"
xsetwacom set "Wacom Cintiq 21UX2 pad" Button 16 "key ctrl z"  # Undo in Gimp
</pre>

=== Sample Runtime Script ===
Now say I have a Bamboo Pen and Touch tablet and I want to write a runtime script for it.  I want to change the PressureCurve for the stylus and eraser, using a softer one for the stylus and a firmer one for the eraser.  Also I have the GTK CPU utilization bug in Gimp so I want to adjust RawSample up to decrease the lag between where the stylus tip is and when the line is drawn in Gimp.  On top of all  that I noticed the stylus wasn't quite reaching the top and left screen edges so after [[Calibration|calibrating]] I have some new tablet area values I want to use.  I'm a pretty quick double tapper who drinks a little too much caffeine and I want to decrease my TapTime a little.  250 msec is an eternity!  Plus I want my scrolling a little more sensitive.  And I want my pad (tablet buttons) to have the default Windows XP setup, just because.

I need to obtain my "device names" by running the [[xinput|xinput  list]] command in a terminal.  Now I can proceed to assemble the following shell script.
<pre>
#!/bin/sh

## Stylus
xsetwacom set "Wacom BambooFun 2FG 4x5 Pen stylus" RawSample 20
xsetwacom set "Wacom BambooFun 2FG 4x5 Pen stylus" PressureCurve 0 10 90 100
xsetwacom set "Wacom BambooFun 2FG 4x5 Pen stylus" Area -10 -20 14720 9200

## Eraser
xsetwacom set "Wacom BambooFun 2FG 4x5 Pen eraser" RawSample 20
xsetwacom set "Wacom BambooFun 2FG 4x5 Pen eraser" PressureCurve 5 0 100 95
xsetwacom set "Wacom BambooFun 2FG 4x5 Pen eraser" Area -10 -20 14720 9200

## Touch (2FGT)
xsetwacom set "Wacom BambooFun 2FG 4x5 Finger touch" ScrollDistance 18
xsetwacom set "Wacom BambooFun 2FG 4x5 Finger touch" TapTime 220

## Pad
xsetwacom set "Wacom BambooFun 2FG 4x5 Finger pad" Button 1 "key ctrl t"  # key combination for toggle touch script
xsetwacom set "Wacom BambooFun 2FG 4x5 Finger pad" Button 2 "key backspace"
xsetwacom set "Wacom BambooFun 2FG 4x5 Finger pad" Button 3 3  # right mouse click
xsetwacom set "Wacom BambooFun 2FG 4x5 Finger pad" Button 4 1  # left mouse click
</pre>
In the sample script above the "device names" were used because they don't change with hot plugging.  The ID # can be used for convience when using a get or set command during a session.  However it can change after a hot plug of the tablet or another usb device.

==== Running the Script at Startup ====
Now I want my new shell script configuration to apply even after a restart.  While you can change your settings on the fly using xsetwacom commands in a terminal, because they are runtime commands they only apply during the current session.  So you need to set a xsetwacom script to auto-start.  Create a file and enter the contents of the script you want into it.  Name it .xsetwacom.sh (or whatever you prefer).

Place the script in a file called bin/.xsetwacom.sh in your home directory.  You may need to create the bin directory in /home/yourusername/ first.  Many distributions recommend placing user binaries and scripts in a user /bin directory rather than just in /home/yourusername/.  Make the script executable with:

  chmod +x $HOME/bin/.xsetwacom.sh

The . in front of xsetwacom makes it a hidden file.  You don't have to do that although it helps prevent directory clutter.  Then in Gnome go to System > Preferences > Startup Applications (or your distribution's equivalent) and click on Add and for the command write "sh /home/yourusername/bin/.xsetwacom.sh" (without the quotes).

=== Profiles ===
A ''Profile'' contains the settings you prefer for an individual program you use your tablet in.  Usually it consists of modifying the pad button assignments but can also involve changing the PressureCurve or Stylus button assignment or whatever else is useful for a given program.  To select different pad button assignments you should become familiar with the keyboard shortcuts available in the program you are interested in.  For e.g. with Gimp look in ''Edit > Keyboard Shortcuts'' or ''Edit > Preferences > Interface > Configure Keyboard Shortcuts''.  For Inkscape it's ''Help > Keys and Mouse reference'' which takes you to the keyboard shortcuts online.  Some of the pad sections above contained possible Gimp and Inkscape button assignments.

So let's write a Gimp profile for a Bamboo tablet.  If you plan on a long or multiple scripts for profiles the following script technique using variable assignment for your "device names" might make them a little easier to write.  Or you could use the vanilla xsetwacom commands like in the [[#Sample Runtime Script|Sample Runtime Script]].  Say the stylus and eraser are already set the way you prefer in Gimp by the startup script, so no need to modify them.  Especially since the stylus Button 3 is already set to middle click (2).  Which is the hand (grab) in Gimp.  And right click (3) brings up the Menus which is fine.  Then you assign the four pad buttons and scroll wheel to commands you find useful in Gimp.
<pre>
#!/bin/bash

DEVICE="Wacom BambooFun 4x5"

STYLUS="$DEVICE stylus"
ERASER="$DEVICE eraser"
PAD="$DEVICE pad"

## Stylus

## Eraser

## Pad
xsetwacom set "$PAD" Button 1 "key shift ctrl n"  # New layer
xsetwacom set "$PAD" Button 2 "key p"  # Paintbrush
xsetwacom set "$PAD" AbsWDn "key minus"  # Zoom out
xsetwacom set "$PAD" AbsWUp "key shift plus"  # Zoom in
xsetwacom set "$PAD" Button 3 "key a"  # Airbrush
xsetwacom set "$PAD" Button 4 "key control z"  # Undo
</pre>
{{Tip|text=Europeans should use ''"key plus"'' for Zoom in.}}
Call it Gimp_Profile.sh or .Gimp_Profile.sh (or whatever you prefer) and Save.  Remember you have to make the profile script executable.

Now let's write an Inkscape profile.  In Inkscape it turns out you prefer the stylus pressure softer and you want the eraser at the default (linear) pressure.  Middle click is also grab, so that's good.  You also want a different set of pad commands, ones that are useful in Inkscape.
<pre>
#!/bin/bash

DEVICE="Wacom BambooFun 4x5"

STYLUS="$DEVICE stylus"
ERASER="$DEVICE eraser"
PAD="$DEVICE pad"

## Stylus
xsetwacom set "$STYLUS" PressureCurve 0 15 85 100

## Eraser
xsetwacom set "$ERASER" PressureCurve 0 0 100 100

## Pad
xsetwacom set "$PAD" Button 1 "key F2"  # Node tool
xsetwacom set "$PAD" Button 2 "key F1"  # Selection tool
xsetwacom set "$PAD" AbsWDn "key minus"  # Zoom out
xsetwacom set "$PAD" AbsWUp "key shift plus"  # Zoom in
xsetwacom set "$PAD" Button 3 "key F9"  # Toggle view mode
xsetwacom set "$PAD" Button 4 "key ctrl z"  # Undo
</pre>
{{Tip|text=Ubuntu users can also add a notification to their script.  First install libnotify <code>sudo apt-get install libnotify-bin</code>.  Then add as the last line of the script <code>notify-send -t 1500 "Gimp Profile Ran"</code>, choosing the appropriate name for the profile.  This may also work for Ubuntu derivatives like Mint.}}
Call it Inkscape_Profile.sh or .Inkscape_Profile.sh then Save and make it executable.

==== Launcher for Profile ====
In Gnome right click on your Desktop and chose ''Create Launcher...''  In your distribution do the equivalent.  In the Launcher enter a name, such as Inkscape Profile.  Then in the Command box add the entire path for the script.  It's a good idea to select an icon also.  Close and the profile script will now run when you double click on the Launcher.

It's also a good idea to set up your general or start up configuration script in a Launcher.  That way when you're done using the application a particular profile applied to, you can restore your general configuration.

== Static (xorg.conf.d or xorg.conf) Configuration ==
Entering ''man wacom'' in a terminal will bring up the Options you can enter into your [[Xorg.conf.d|/etc/X11/xorg.conf.d/52-wacom-options.conf]] or in the [[Configuring X#Manual setup in the xorg.conf|xorg.conf]].
{{Warning|reason=Adding or altering any X configuration file runs the risk of breaking X.  Be sure to back up the current working 50-wacom.conf or xorg.conf and be prepared to restore it from the command line when booting into your distribution's Recovery mode.  If you are creating a 52-wacom-options.conf or xorg.conf be sure you know how to rename or remove it from the command line before you do so.  Once the new file is working do not forget to back it up.}}

=== xorg.conf.d ===
In ''xorg.conf.d'' you may not be able to configure dependent devices, depending on your X server version.  However hot plugging is supported.  To configure your devices you add a 52-wacom-options.conf file to /etc/X11/xorg.conf.d and add the Options to it.  See '''[[Xorg.conf.d]]''' for detailed explanation and examples on how to use it.

=== xorg.conf ===
In your ''xorg.conf'' you can configure dependent devices but your configuration will likely not last through a hotplug.  Start entering your Options for each input tool below the last Option line you use from the '''[[Configuring X#Manual setup in the xorg.conf|Example xorg.conf]]''' in your xorg.conf.  Unless you use the Nvidia binary video driver you are likely not to have an xorg.conf and would need to create one.  Locate it in /etc/X11 as /etc/X11/xorg.conf.  When you use a xorg.conf remember the "device names" in ''xinput list'' will be stylus, eraser, cursor, touch, and pad, depending on your input tools.


[[Category:HOWTO]]