The driver features a built-in test suite for 
[http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/White-box_testing white box testing]. Simply running
  make check

will compile and run the tests.


== How it works ==
All test are located in the <code>test/</code> directory and they re-use the driver sources. The setup is rather special as we want to test functions in the driver that are declared static (and thus not accessible from outside).

Thus, the environment is set up that the keywork ''static'' is undefined on compilation. This will generate a number of warnings on compilation time but the resulting object files will have any symbol accessible.

However, the disadvantage is that we cannot use the ''static'' keyword in tests, especially not for variables.


== Writing a test ==

{{Tip|text=Writing tests can be painful but they beat restarting X for quick input/output testing. Over time, the time spent writing tests pays off easily.}}

To write a new test, look at <code>test/wacom-tests.c</code> and take guidance from there. The basic approach is to add a call to a test function to <code>main()</code> in the form of
  g_test_add_func("/common/refcounting", test_common_ref);

The first argument is simply a human-readable path printed out when testing. The second argument is your test function. Prefix all of them with ''test''.

The test function itself must set up the required environment and then call the actual functions to test. Afterwards, use <code>g_assert</code> to ensure the right values are returned.
<pre>
static void
test_wcm_some_function(void)
{

  ... do some setup here

  othervalue = wcm_some_function(somevalue);
  g_assert(somevalue > othervalue);
  g_assert(othervalue >= 0);
  ...
}
</pre>


[[Category:DeveloperPages]]