__TOC__
This page is for general tablet issues & tips as well as model specific issues & tips.

The LWP project welcomes additions to its mediawiki so please join in if you have contributions.

Be aware the Wacom drivers are rapidly evolving and some of this information may become dated.  If so feel free to update and correct the mediawiki.

== Bamboo Pen & Touch ==
In October of 2009 Wacom released a new series of 5 tablets we'll call generically the Bamboo Pen & Touch's.  The Bamboo Pen had a stylus (with no eraser), the Bamboo Touch had 2FG touch only, and the Bamboo Pen & Touch's came with a stylus/eraser and touch(2FG)/pad(4 tablet buttons).  This was followed in October of 2010 by the release of 5 new Bamboo Pen & Touch's with two of them being "Special Editions" with 4FGT.

To determine your product ID enter in a terminal 'lsusb' and look in the Wacom line.  The first 5 models are the 0xD0, 0xD1, 0xD2, 0xD3, & 0xD4.  The new models are the 0xD6, 0xD7, 0xD8, 0xDA, & 0xDB.  See [[Device IDs]].

=== Setup ===
Depending on your distribution's kernel the 5 original models may not be recognized because the default wacom.ko with the kernel may not have the models in it.  If your distribution has not backported support, and has no plans to do so, it probably is a better idea to wait for a release that supports your tablet.  However if you feel you can't wait and must be able to use your BambooPT now you could use  linuxwacom-0.8.8-10's wacom.ko as it does have the models in it.  Installing out-of-tree kernel patches is never a good idea, so give this some thought before proceeding.  If you decide to proceed see [[Linuxwacom]].

Note the location of the newly compiled wacom.ko will appear in the output after the ./configure line under the ''BUILD OPTIONS:'' header.  Just copy it into place.

Keeping the cavets about out-of-tree kernel patches mentioned above in mind, the newer 5 models are supported by [[input-wacom]]-0.10.10-2, which has all 10 of the models added.

All 10 models have been added to [[xf86-input-wacom|xf86-input-wacom-0.10.10+]] and later as of January 21, 2011.

=== Bamboo P&T Touch Toggle Script ===
Turning touch off helps to avoid accidental input if you touch the tablet when not holding the stylus (it also duplicates the function and button assignment in Windows).

The following script requires [[xsetwacom]].  The device name for touch is found by using ''xsetwacom list dev'' as mentioned in the script comments. 
<pre>
#!/bin/bash

## Get the "Device name" or ID number
## for touch from 'xsetwacom list dev'

DEVICE="Wacom BambooFun 2FG 4x5 Finger touch" 
TOUCH_STATE=`xsetwacom get "$DEVICE" touch`
if [ "$TOUCH_STATE" == "on" ]
  then
    echo "Touch is ON, turning OFF."
    xsetwacom set "$DEVICE" touch off
  else
    echo "Touch is OFF, turning ON."
    xsetwacom set "$DEVICE" touch on
fi
</pre>
Place the script in a file called ''bin/toggle-touch.sh'' in your home directory. Make the script executable with ''chmod +x $HOME/bin/toggle-touch.sh''. Then you have to make a key binding for it in order to assign it to a tablet button. This depends on your window manager.

=== Compiz ===
If your window manager is compiz, install the CompizConfig Settings Manager (if you haven't already).

We are attempting the following setup: when you press button 1, you toggle between touch on or off.

The setup for this is a bit roundabout though:
* configure the tablet to send a key combination when button 1 is pressed.
* the key combination triggers the window manager to run the script above
* the script then toggles the button

In the configuration example below, we will use button 1 and the key combination of Ctrl+T. If you chose a different button or key combination, replace the occurances accordingly.

To configure all this, do the following:

* first, configure the tablet to send the key combination
<pre>
xsetwacom set "Wacom BambooFun 2FG 4x5 Finger touch" Button1 "key ctrl t"
</pre>
* then, in the CompizConfig Settings Manager, click on the General option
* click on Commands
* in Command line 0 (or whatever line you want) add the path to toggle-touch.sh, e.g.: ''/home/yourusername/bin/toggle-touch.sh''
* click on Key Bindings and then to edit the corresponding Run command 0 click on the Disabled button.
* press the Grab key combination button and then press the key combination
* tablet button 1 should now toggle the touch between on and off

{{Tip|text=If you are using a xorg.conf the symlink for the Bamboo P&T pad is wacom-touch not wacom.}}

Please also see [[USB Tablets with Touch]] for some configuration idiosyncrasies.

== Intuos4 ==

=== Intuos4 Wireless ===
Unfortunately the Intuos 4 Wireless is not currently supported by the Bluez stack.  It is not simply a matter of adding the Vendor ID 0x56a and Product ID 0xBD alongside the Graphire Bluetooth Wireless' 0x56a & 0x81.  This is because the Graphire Bluetooth Wireless is a Protocol 4 device (tool serial numbers are not reported) while the Intuos 4 Wireless is Protocol 5 (serial numbers reported).  So code for Protocol 5 support needs to be added to the Bluez stack.  In the meantime you will need to use your usb "charging" cable for your tablet to work in linux.

=== OLED's ===
Content Pending.


== Calibration of Your Tablet ==
See the [[Calibration|Calibration HOWTO]].

== Configuration of Your Tablet ==
See [[Tablet Configuration]].

== Dual and Multi-Monitor Set Up ==
See [[Dual and Multi-Monitor Set Up]].

== Graphical Configuration GUI ==
Work is proceeding on a replacement for wacomcpl.  See [[External applications#Graphical Configuration Tools|Graphical Configuration Tools]].

== Pad Physical Button to X Button Transpositions ==
The pad or tablet physical button order does not necessarily correspond to the button numbers used for xsetwacom commands.  You may need to use a transposition.  This depends on several things including what defaults the kernel is reporting and whether xf86-input-wacom is respecting Xinput's button mapping.  For one example versions of Xinput reserve buttons 4, 5, 6, and 7 for vertical and horizontal scroll.

So for some kernels (e.g. 2.6.32 and 2.6.35) you find that while:
<pre>
Physical Button 1 = X Button 1
Physical Button 2 = X Button 2
Physical Button 3 = X Button 3
</pre>
because of the reserve of 4 through 7 for scroll:
<pre>
Physical Button 4 = X Button 8
</pre>
If you want a ''xsetwacom set'' command to apply to Button 4 you would need to call it Button 8.  And this offset of 4 would continue to apply, to say an Intuos4, as follows:
<pre>
Physical Button 4 = X Button 8
Physical Button 5 = X Button 9
Physical Button 6 = X Button 10
etc.
</pre>
Keeping in mind for the Intuos4 the button inside the touchring is Button 1.

Another example is the BambooPT's button transpostions with the 2.6.38 kernel due to the changed kernel defaults.
<pre>
Physical Button 1 = BTN_RIGHT   = X Button 3
Physical Button 2 = BTN_BACK    = X Button 8
Physical Button 3 = BTN_FORWARD = X Button 9
Physical Button 4 = BTN_LEFT    = X Button 1
</pre>
The transpositions aren't randomn, although admittedly they may seem that way without a pre-existing knowledge of the kernel changes.

Since this also means the ''xsetwacom get'' command won't return the current assigned value, until you have determined the correct button number to use, you're in a bit of a circular bind.  If you are unable to determine what the defaults are set to by testing the buttons, you may need to run through the available button numbers starting with 1 to find your current transpositions.


[[Category:HOWTO]]