__TOC__
The wacom-kernel git repository is a recent reflection of the current [http://kernel.org/ linux kernel], and is intended to be used to assist Wacom kernel module development.  To check how closely synchronized wacom-kernel is with the '''mainline''' kernel select ''Gitweb'' to browse the kernel's git repository.

== wacom-kernel ==
The git repository is available to [http://sourceforge.net/p/linuxwacom/wacom-kernel/ref/master~/ browse here].  It consists of 3 branches:  devel, master, and tested.

To clone the wacom-kernel git repository use:
<pre>
git clone git://git.code.sf.net/p/linuxwacom/wacom-kernel
</pre>

== Working with a Wacom Module ==
The devel branch is intended for working with the modules.  Use ''git checkout'' to select it:
<pre>
cd wacom-kernel
git checkout devel
</pre>
Depending on the module you wish to work with change to the appropriate directory.
*wacom.ko files:  wacom.h, wacom_sys.c, wacom_wac.c, wacom_wac.h
**in drivers/input/tablet
*hid-wacom.ko file:  hid-wacom.c
**in drivers/hid
*wacom_w8001.ko file:  wacom_w8001.c
**in drivers/input/touchscreen

Make your changes.  There is a Makefile in the wacom-kernel/wacom-kernel directory that makes it a bit easier to compile & install the wacom modules.  See Makefile Options below.

== Makefile Options ==
Selected Wacom modules can be built and installed with the different wacom-kernel/wacom-kernel/Makefile options.

=== Current Module Build and Install Options ===
{{Tip|text=Module hid-wacom is always built with CONFIG_HID_WACOM_POWER_SUPPLY=y.}}
# '''"make"''':
#* builds all modules
# '''modules'''
## '''"make modules"''' - builds:
##* drivers/input/tablet/wacom.ko
## '''"make install"''' - installs:
##* drivers/input/tablet/wacom.ko
# '''btmodules'''
## '''"make btmodules"''' - builds:
##* drivers/hid/hid-wacom.ko
##* drivers/hid/hid.ko
##* drivers/hid/usbhid/usbhid.ko
## '''"make btinstall"''' - installs:
##* drivers/hid/hid-wacom.ko
##* drivers/hid/hid.ko
##* drivers/hid/usbhid/usbhid.ko
# '''tsmodules'''
## '''"make tsmodules"''' - builds:
##* drivers/input/touchscreen/wacom_w8001.ko
## '''"make tsinstall"''' - installs:
##* drivers/input/touchscreen/wacom_w8001.ko
# '''"make clean"''':
#* deletes all wacom related modules and build files

== Sample Workflow ==
A possible workflow could consist of the following:
# Make changes to the module code.
# Add the changed file with ''git add'' and sometimes do a ''git commit''.
# Then cd to wacom-kernel (use separate terminal for that) and ''make modules'' (might use the alternative ''make btmodules'' if working on hid-wacom).
# If the compilation goes OK do a ''make install'' from a separate terminal with root account. (could use ''make btinstall'' if you used ''make btmodules'' in 3).
# Now ''rmmod'' the new module and after restarting the tablet the new module is loaded.
# Test if the changes worked.

A more concrete example is Przemo's typical workflow for the Intous4 W (he does all work from the main kernel directory).
{{Tip|text=Step 4 may fail if module hid-wacom isn't loaded, which can happen with the very first load. Instead try "make btmodules && sudo make btinstall".  Also if compilation fails "sudo rmmod ..." is not executed.}}
# Make changes to drivers/hid/hid-wacom.c:
#* vim drivers/hid/hid-wacom.c
# Commit the changes:
#* git commit -a -s -m "HID: wacom: My patch"
#: -a all files,
#: -s my signature,
#: -m name of the patch
# Switch off the tablet.
# Run "make btmodules && sudo rmmod hid-wacom && sudo btinstall".
# Turn on the tablet - setting up bluetooth connection triggers loading of the hid-wacom.ko module.
# Test changes.
# If the changes aren't good go back to 1.
# If the changes are good enough to be submitted generate a patch:
#* git format-patch HEAD~1
# Check if the patch is OK:
#* scripts/checkpatch.pl 0001-HID-wacom-My-patch.patch
# Submit patch to linuxwacom-devel list:
#* git send-email --to linuxwacom-devel@lists.sourceforge.net 0001-HID-wacom-My-patch.patch

== Maintainer ==
The repository is maintained by Przemo Firszt.

Please do not send email regarding bugs or feature requests to the maintainer. Use the [[mailing lists]] instead.


[[Category:DeveloperPages]]