This page is for general tablet issues & tips as well as model specific issues & tips.

The linuxwacom project welcomes additions to its mediawiki so please join in if you have contributions.

Be aware the Wacom drivers are rapidly evolving and some of this information may become dated.  If so feel free to update and correct the mediawiki.

== Set Up ==
If you have at least the 2.6.35 kernel, particularly the more recent versions, you should be able to get your tablet working on the Wacom driver.  Patches have been submitted by Nikolai Kondrashov to the kernel that should improve Waltop tablet compatibility with the Wacom driver starting in the 2.6.36 or 2.6.37 kernels. Waltop tablets are often re-branded and will carry another OEM's name.  To verify that your tablet/stylus is indeed identified as a WALTOP (and to determine the identifier for the match line) enter in a terminal the following.
<pre>
xinput list
</pre>
You should see WALTOP (capitalized) in the tablet/stylus line.  If you see another tablet name in the line you do not have a Waltop.  Use the version of Waltop you see in the match line for the following usb snippet in 50-wacom.conf.  The usb snippet is easy to identify because it has a couple of comment lines discussing Waltops.  Just change the snippet to look like the following.
<pre>
Section "InputClass"
	Identifier "Wacom class"
	MatchProduct "Wacom|WACOM|Hanwang|WALTOP"
	MatchDevicePath "/dev/input/event*"
	Driver "wacom"
EndSection
</pre>
And that should be it.  After a reboot your Waltop should now be using the Wacom X driver [[xf86-input-wacom]].  Since it is a system file you need root privileges.  If your system has sudo installed you can use
<pre>
gksudo gedit /usr/share/X11/xorg.conf.d/50-wacom.conf
</pre>

It's possible additional changes to support your Waltop may have been made since your distribution's default version of [[xf86-input-wacom]].  If your distribution hasn't been updating it you may want to consider cloning it from the git repository.

'''Tip''' If you have problems with both stylus buttons giving the same response despite being set to different values please report your issue to [https://lists.sourceforge.net/lists/listinfo/linuxwacom-discuss linuxwacom-discuss].

== Calibration of Your Stylus ==
See the [[Calibration|Calibration HOWTO]].

== Dual and Multi-Monitor Set Up ==
See [[Dual and Multi-Monitor Set Up]].

== Graphical Configuration GUI ==
Work is proceeding on a replacement for wacomcpl.  See [[External applications#Graphical Configuration Tools|Graphical Configuration Tools]].

== Tablet Configuration ==
{{Unclear|reason=
* Why is this here? Other than the options, this isn't waltop-specific and can be moved to a separate page
* Which one of the options are non-default and why don't we just make them default in the driver?}}

Currently [[xf86-input-wacom]] does not have a configuration gui like linuxwacom's Wacom Control Panel (wacomcpl).  However since '''wacomcpl''' stored its settings as a [[xsetwacom]] script in '''.xinitrc''' we can at least duplicate the .xinitrc, calling it say '''.xsetwacom.sh'''.  Below is a sample script for your stylus.

While doing things this way may seem a little strange at first you'll find yourself quickly adapting.  And this allows you some of the finer control over your stylus features that wacomcpl gave you.

'''Note''' While these xsetwacom commands were working as of 2-1-11 be aware that the xsetwacom interface may change without notice.  If this happens feel free to update and correct this linxwacom mediawiki page.

If a xsetwacom command stops working your friend is the get command.
{{:Xsetwacom}}

=== Installing the Script ===
While you can change your settings on the fly using xsetwacom commands in a terminal they only apply during the current session.  So you need to set it up to auto-start.  Create a file and copy & paste the contents of the script you want into it.  Rename it .xsetwacom.sh (or whatever you want) and place it in your home directory. Remember it will be a hidden file because of the . in front. To enable the xsetwacom commands in the .xsetwacom.sh file to apply to Xserver through a reboot you enter in a terminal.
<pre>
chmod +x ~/.xsetwacom.sh
</pre>
Or you could right click on the file and in Properties, in the Permission tab, check Execute as program. Then go to System->Preferences->Startup Applications (or your distributions equivalent) and click on Add and for the command write "sh /home/yourusername/.xsetwacom.sh" (without the quotes).

Once the script is executable you can double click on it to apply it's settings or reboot to check the auto-start set up.

=== The Sample Waltop Xsetwacom Script ===
In the example script below both "Device name" and ID # are used. Be sure to check for yours using 'xinput  list' (without the quotes) in a terminal and use them. If you are hot plugging your tablet or other devices be sure to use "Device name" as the ID # can change.
<pre>
## Device names and ID numbers from 'xinput list' entered in a terminal.
#
## In the example both "Device name" and ID # are used.
#
## If you are hot plugging use "Device name" as ID # can change.
#
## ClickForce changes name to Threshold with xf86-input-wacom 0.10.9 (11-19-10)
#
## Warning:  Changing Mode to either Absolute or Relative in the script stops the
## mouse from being able to pull guidelines out of the ruler in Gimp.

## stylus = ID 12 = "WALTOP International Corp. Slim Tablet stylus"
xsetwacom set "WALTOP International Corp. Slim Tablet stylus" Suppress "4"  # data pt.s trimmed, default is 4, 0-20
xsetwacom set "WALTOP International Corp. Slim Tablet stylus" RawSample "2"  # data pt.s filtered, default is 2, 0-100 
xsetwacom set "WALTOP International Corp. Slim Tablet stylus" ClickForce "27"  # pressure, default is 27, range is 0-2047
#xsetwacom set "WALTOP International Corp. Slim Tablet stylus" Threshold "27"  # pressure, default is 27, range is 0-2047
xsetwacom set "WALTOP International Corp. Slim Tablet stylus" PressCurve "5 10 90 95" # Bezier curve, default is 0,0,100,100
xsetwacom set "WALTOP International Corp. Slim Tablet stylus" TPCButton "on"  # stylus tip + button, or "off" for hover mode
#xsetwacom set 12 Mode "Absolute"  # or Relative cursor movement
xsetwacom set 12 Button1 "1"  # left mouse click
xsetwacom set 12 Button2 "3"  # right mouse click
xsetwacom set 12 Button3 "2"  # middle mouse click
## if needed, add your tablet's coordinates
#xsetwacom set "WALTOP International Corp. Slim Tablet stylus" topy "0"
#xsetwacom set "WALTOP International Corp. Slim Tablet stylus" topx "0"
#xsetwacom set "WALTOP International Corp. Slim Tablet stylus" bottomy "11250"
#xsetwacom set "WALTOP International Corp. Slim Tablet stylus" bottomx "20000"

## Developed with stefan-koch @ Ubuntu forums
</pre>


[[Category:HOWTO]]