The xf86-input-wacom driver is the wacom-specific X11 input driver for the X.Org X Server version 1.7 and later (X11R7.5 or later).

=== Installing from git ===

<pre>
git clone git://linuxwacom.git.sourceforge.net/gitroot/linuxwacom/xf86-input-wacom
cd xf86-input-wacom
./autogen.sh --prefix=/usr
make && make install
</pre>

This gets the latest version from git and installs it into the given prefix. In most cases, the prefix of /usr is the right one. If you're on a 64-bit machine, configure with --libdir=/usr/lib64. If unsure, search for evdev_drv.so. If it is in /usr/lib/xorg/modules/input, then the prefix of /usr is enough. If it is in /usr/lib64/xorg/modules/input, then you need to specify --libdir=/usr/lib64.

=== Configuration ===
==== Hotplugging setup with HAL ====
Ideally, you should be using the X Server's hotplugging features instead of manual configuration. This allows you to (un)plug the device at runtime. The driver provides a wacom.fdi file that is by default installed into HAL's policy directory (<i>/usr/share/hal/fdi/policy/20thirdparty</i>). Once installed, you need to restart HAL and verify that the right driver will be loaded.

<pre>
$> lshal | grep wacom
  info.linux.driver = 'wacom'  (string)
  input.x11_driver = 'wacom'  (string)
</pre>

The second line shows that there is at least one device that will be using the wacom driver. If this line is missing, the fdi is not installed in the correct place, HAL hasn't been restarted, the device is not plugged in or some other error occured. The full lshal output for your tablet device will usually look something like this:
<pre>
udi = '/org/freedesktop/Hal/devices/usb_device_56a_b9_noserial_if0_logicaldev_input'
  info.capabilities = {'input', 'input.tablet'} (string list)
  info.category = 'input'  (string)
  info.parent = '/org/freedesktop/Hal/devices/usb_device_56a_b9_noserial_if0'  (string)
  info.product = 'Wacom Intuos4 6x9'  (string)
  info.subsystem = 'input'  (string)
  info.udi = '/org/freedesktop/Hal/devices/usb_device_56a_b9_noserial_if0_logicaldev_input'  (string)
  input.device = '/dev/input/event10'  (string)
  input.originating_device = '/org/freedesktop/Hal/devices/usb_device_56a_b9_noserial_if0'  (string)
  input.product = 'Wacom Intuos4 6x9'  (string)
  input.x11_driver = 'wacom'  (string)
  linux.device_file = '/dev/input/event10'  (string)
  linux.hotplug_type = 2  (0x2)  (int)
  linux.subsystem = 'input'  (string)
  linux.sysfs_path = '/sys/devices/pci0000:00/0000:00:1a.1/usb4/4-1/4-1:1.0/input/input47/event10'  (string)
</pre>

==== Manual setup in the xorg.conf ====

{{:xorg.conf}}

=== Testing ===
Once installed, you need to restart the X server. Either hit Ctrl+Alt+Backspace (if enabled), log out or reboot, whichever you prefer. If the driver is working successfully, the log should show an entry similar to this one:

<pre>
(II) LoadModule: "wacom"
(II) Loading /opt/xorg/lib/xorg/modules/input/wacom_drv.so
(II) Module wacom: vendor="X.Org Foundation"
        compiled for 1.7.99.3, module version = 0.10.3
        Module class: X.Org XInput Driver
        ABI class: X.Org XInput driver, version 9.0
</pre>

This snippet shows a wacom version of 0.10.3 compiled against a server version 1.7.99.3. In addition, you'll find lines in the log listing the actual device found and its configuration.
<pre>
(II) config/hal: Adding input device Wacom Intuos4 6x9
(**) Option "Device" "/dev/input/event13"
(II) Wacom Intuos4 6x9: type not specified, assuming 'stylus'.
(II) Wacom Intuos4 6x9: other types will be automatically added.
(**) Wacom Intuos4 6x9: always reports core events
(II) Wacom Intuos4 6x9: hotplugging dependent devices.
(**) Option "Device" "/dev/input/event13"
(**) Wacom Intuos4 6x9 eraser: always reports core events
(II) XINPUT: Adding extended input device "Wacom Intuos4 6x9 eraser" (type: ERASER)
(--) Wacom Intuos4 6x9 eraser: using pressure threshold of 245 for button 1
(--) Wacom Intuos4 6x9 eraser: Wacom USB Intuos4 tablet speed=38400 maxX=44704 maxY=27940 maxZ=2047 resX=5080 resY=5080  tilt=enabled
(--) Wacom Intuos4 6x9 eraser: top X=0 top Y=0 bottom X=44704 bottom Y=27940 resol X=5080 resol Y=5080
(**) Option "Device" "/dev/input/event13"
(**) Wacom Intuos4 6x9 cursor: always reports core events
(II) XINPUT: Adding extended input device "Wacom Intuos4 6x9 cursor" (type: CURSOR)
(--) Wacom Intuos4 6x9 cursor: top X=0 top Y=0 bottom X=44704 bottom Y=27940 resol X=5080 resol Y=5080
(**) Option "Device" "/dev/input/event13"
(**) Wacom Intuos4 6x9 pad: always reports core events
(II) XINPUT: Adding extended input device "Wacom Intuos4 6x9 pad" (type: PAD)
(--) Wacom Intuos4 6x9 pad: top X=0 top Y=0 bottom X=44704 bottom Y=27940 resol X=5080 resol Y=5080
(II) Wacom Intuos4 6x9: hotplugging completed.
</pre>

The actual text of the log depends on the device but it looks similar.