The xf86Wacom driver is divided into seven distinct pieces.

:* XInput application interface
:* module management and configuration
:* data path and event notification
:* raw data filter
:* supporting user space configuration
:* compatibility operations for 3.x and 4.x versions of XFree86
:* device-specific functionality 

'''xf86Wacom.c'''

The core elements of the driver, particularly the functions necessary to implement the XInput interface are contained in xf86Wacom.c. Here, the devices declared in the InputDevice sections of XF86Config are opened, closed, and configured. This is also where the device capabilities are declared and valuator ranges are set.

'''wcmConfig.c'''

All options supported by the driver are queried and set in wcmConfig.c. This includes values like Threshold, BaudRate, and Suppress. Some parameters are global to all tablets, while others are specific to a single tablet. Most parameters apply to a particular class of tool for a given tablet. It is also possible to subdivide the tablet into discrete regions, and devices may be assigned serial numbers to uniquely identify a particular tool.

Code for loading and unloading the module is also contained in wcmConfig.c. The driver can be loaded into memory as a module or compiled directly into the XFree86 libraries. Additionally, this driver can be compiled for the 3.x and 4.x version of XFree86 as well as X.org 6.x and 7.x. Some care has been taken to preserve the ability to compile for 3.x; however, actual testing is not generally performed. For all intents and purposes, only the 4.x version of XFree86 and X.org are actively supported.

'''wcmCommon.c'''

The functionality which implements the data path, filters, and event notifications is located in wcmCommon.c. In principal, all devices should report their data to the xf86WcmEvent function in precisely the same way: unfiltered, but within valid ranges, and normalized. As an example, some devices report pressure internally as -128 to 127; normalized pressure values would be from 0 to 255 for such a device. Once in the data path, filtering for suppression, rotations, ZAxisMapping, and the like are performed as needed. Ultimately, the event is dispatched to the XInput subsystem and on to the appropriate client applications.

'''wcmFilter.c'''

Pressure sensitivity is one of the essential feature of Wacom tablet. This code enables user to customize pressure output to their own preference, such as firm, mild, soft. This code also enables user to filter tablet raw data. Changing the RawSample parameter is not recommanded since it normally reduces the data rate which reduces data accuracy. RawSample may be used to deal with jitter of unknown cause. If this is your case, you most probably need to test a range of RawSamples to figure out the most suitable one.

'''wcmXCommand.c'''

To facilitate the configuration and access to the driver from user space, a command line utility program called xsetwacom is introduced. wcmXCommand.c is the driver side interface to receive and reply to xsetwacom calls. Every command in xsetwacom is processed here before it goes into the driver to set or retrieve information. Configuration data is validated here.

'''wcmCompat.c'''

In order to maintain compatibility with the XFree86 3.x build, the names of many routines are aliased using macros or implemented depending on the platform and version. As an example, xf86WcmWait is implemented differently for both major versions of XFree86. In contrast, xf86WcmOpenTablet is simply aliased to xf86OpenSerial for version 4.x while fully implemented using the low-level open call in version 3.x.

'''wcmSerial.c, wcmUSB.c, and wcmISDV4.c'''

At present, there are three different classes of tablets: auto-detecting serial tablets, Linux Input System based USB tablets, and ISDV4 protocol based serial Tablet PC's. Each tablet class implements a detection, initialization, and device reading function. Using this model, new device classes can be added easily.


<center><small>
Copyright (C) 2002-2011 - LinuxWacom

This website and its contents are licensed under the GNU GENERAL PUBLIC LICENSE.
</small></center>


[[Category:Linuxwacom]]